Infobesity and Fake News Mitigation on
WhatsApp and Telegram: A Retrieval-Augmented
Generation Approach
Rooney Kalumba1 , Ferdinand Kahenga1,3 , Jonathan Bayongwa1 , and Jovita Mateus2,3
1 Faculté des sciences informatiques, Université Don Bosco de Lubumbashi, Lubumbashi, DRC
2 Department of Computer Science, Namibia University of Science and Technology, Windhoek, Namibia
3 Department of Computer Science, University of the Western Cape, Cape Town, South Africa

E-mail: 22ki129@esisalama.org, fkahenga@udbl.ac.cd, jbayongwa@udbl.ac.cd, mnyakukweni@gmail.com

Abstract—Infobesity and fake news are two interconnected
phenomena amplified by social media platforms, particularly
WhatsApp and Telegram. This work proposes a flexible framework designed to mitigate both issues by enforcing the accuracy
of responses, intelligently managing the fact-checking process
and its outputs, and integrating automatic signaling to classify
content. The framework also addresses the increasingly common
practice of sharing images containing written comments by
leveraging targeted crawling to build subject-related datasets,
Optical Character Recognition (OCR) to extract information,
content similarity scoring, and Retrieval-Augmented Generation. An initial testbed has been implemented in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo context, processing over 13,000 articles.
At this stage, French constitutes the majority of the corpus,
with English and Swahili included in smaller proportions. Early
results indicate that the framework has the potential to reduce
both information overload and misinformation dissemination,
while remaining adaptable to diverse sources and languages.
Index Terms—Infobesity, Fake news, WhatsApp, Optical
Character Recognition, Retrieval-Augmented Generation

I. I NTRODUCTION
The rapid global adoption of instant messaging services
has profoundly transformed information ecosystems, introducing new modes of news sharing and dissemination. This
shift has created a dual challenge: infobesity (information
overload) and the viral spread of fake news (disinformation),
interconnected phenomena further amplified by the pervasive
influence of social media platforms [1]. Within closed and
encrypted environments, these dynamics converge into a
distinctive crisis for democratic discourse and public health.
The meso-communication dimension of platforms such as
WhatsApp and Telegram fosters large virtual groups where
vast numbers of individuals exchange diverse content, amplifying both the risk of misinformation and the roots of
infobesity.
These challenges unfold across several dimensions:
• Crisis of Truth in Messengerized Societies: Private,
encrypted communication spaces blur the line between
fact and fiction, intensifying the ”post-truth” paradigm.
Platforms like WhatsApp bypass traditional gatekeeping, becoming central vectors for misinformation and
threats to democratic stability [2]–[4].

Theoretical Framework of Infobesity and Fatigue: Infobesity arises when data input exceeds cognitive capacity, often framed through health metaphors such as
a weakened ”cognitive immune system.” This overload
leads to social media fatigue, disengagement, and diminished critical evaluation [5]–[7].
• WhatsApp and Hidden Virality: End-to-end encryption
and group-based sharing foster “hidden virality,” where
misinformation circulates within trusted networks before detection. This complicates established methods for
combating misinformation [8]–[10].
To mitigate misinformation on social media platforms, efforts have been made to develop monitoring tools (e.g., WhatsApp Monitor) [11] as well as automatic and semi-automatic
fact-checking systems (such as helplines) [7]. External monitoring tools capture and sort messages based on popularity
criteria within public groups. When combined with fake-ness
scoring algorithms, these tools can rapidly identify widely
disseminated false content, allowing fact-checkers to focus
their attention on the most critical cases [10].
The problems of the existing automatic solutions are: (1)
excessive responses may contribute to information overload
when fact-checking and its outputs are not intelligently
managed, (2) information updates are often heavier and more
complex than the misinformation spread itself, and (3) the
context and environment of commonly used sources are
region-based, which excludes certain region-specific misinformation and fails to account for languages used in countries
such as the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
In this work, we conceptualize infobesity and fake news
as two distinct yet interconnected challenges that exploit the
same communication channels. We propose a strategy to
mitigate their impact through instant validation techniques.
The major contribution of this study is the design of a
new framework intended for integration into widely used
social networking applications, specifically WhatsApp and
Telegram. This framework directly addresses the dual challenge of infobesity and disinformation by accounting for the
unique ways in which information circulates within groups
and private conversations—namely, speed and volume.
•

The framework provides:
1) The ability to scan and identify reliable information
sources within a very short time interval;
2) The ability to read WhatsApp messages selected by
the user for verification, or to automatically process
messages from public groups;
3) The ability to define key thematic areas for verification
and establish a scoring system to classify information;
4) The ability to generate concise summaries with references (using RAG), while signaling whether a piece
of information has already been processed within the
same group or elsewhere;
5) Flexibility to add context-specific sources that account
for geographic and linguistic diversity.
6) Possibility to connect to other existing tools and API.
We argue that by enforcing the accuracy of responses provided by the framework, ensuring the intelligent management
of the fact-checking process and its outputs (topic-related and
relevance), and combining these with automatic signaling,
group members and individual users will be able to quickly
identify which information is accurate, novel, and useful,
thereby enhancing their engagement with trustworthy content.
II. R ELATED WORK
This critical review synthesizes the current scientific literature regarding the nature of misinformation, its propagation
mechanisms on messaging platforms, and the efficacy of
proposed technical and social mitigation strategies, while
identifying the existing gap in addressing the convergence
of infobesity and structural mitigation.
Current research emphasizes that technical detection must
be paired with human-centric and structural interventions to
effectively combat information overload and misinformation.

B. Automated Dialogue and Fact Delivery
1) Fact Bots: These automated accounts can be integrated
into private ”meso-spaces” (like WhatsApp groups) to provide real-time verification [7]. However, audience reception
is polarized; some users find them intrusive, while others
see them as essential tools for ”educating others” in a safe
environment.
2) TRHF Framework: To neutralize the toxicity of internet trolls without provoking further conflict, the TRHF
framework uses Large Language Models (LLMs) to generate
rational, low-toxicity responses [14]. This aims to maintain
healthy online discourse and prevent the spread of inflammatory disinformation.
C. Integrated Social, Structural, and Platform Interventions
Social and structural interventions emphasize the role of
trusted community leaders in high power-distance contexts,
who act as informal moderators to enforce group rules and
disseminate verified information, thereby overcoming mistrust toward official sources [9]. Structural approaches, such
as placing users in structured information-sharing networks,
synchronize decision-making and reduce partisan bias, leading to greater agreement on content moderation and less emotional stress in evaluating controversial material [15]. At the
platform level, behavioral strategies like conscious consumption habits, time reminders, and notification management
help mitigate social media fatigue [6], while transparency
measures—including anonymous reporting and ordered disclosure by platform owners—address the burden of hidden
virality in encrypted apps [8]. Together, these interventions
combine community gatekeeping, structural synchronization,
behavioral design, and platform accountability to strengthen
resilience against misinformation.
D. Comparison of Proposed Mitigation Strategies

A. Technical and Algorithmic Detection
1) Prioritized Ranking (WhatsApp Monitor): To manage
the ”deluge of information” that overwhelms human factcheckers, Reis et al. propose a ”fakeness score” model [10].
This system uses the XGBoost machine learning algorithm
to rank viral images based on their likelihood of being
fabricated, allowing agencies to focus their limited resources
on the most probable threats.
2) Group-Level Bot Detection: As social bots evolve to
mimic human behavior more closely, detection has shifted
from individual profiling to ”group analysis” [12]. By using
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) and analyzing ”group-level
features,” researchers can identify coordinated misinformation campaigns that exploit platform scale to fuel infobesity.
3) Segmented Summarization: To address the cognitive
load of ”long-document analysis” on social media, Wang
et al. developed a pipeline that uses spectral dynamic segmentation and transformer models (BART) to create concise
summaries [13]. This helps users rapidly grasp core themes
without being buried under a ”deluge of data”.

Table I summarizes the main mitigation strategies proposed
in the literature for combating fake news and infobesity.
TABLE I: Comparison of Proposed Mitigation Strategies
Strategy Category
Algorithmic Ranking
Fact Bots

Target
Fake News

Community
Gatekeeping
Segmented Summarization
TRHF Framework

Fake News

Network Synchronization
Behavioral Habits

Fake News

Infobesity
Trolling/Fake
News
Partisan
Bias
Fatigue/ Infobesity

Key Mechanism
XGBoost ”fakeness scores” for prioritizing fact-checking effort.
Automated delivery of factual data
into private/meso-chat groups.
Engaging trusted leaders for informal content moderation.
Distilling high-volume documents
into concise semantic chunks.
LLM-generated rational responses
to neutralize provocateurs.
Structured peer networks to correct
anchoring bias and reduce stress.
”Conscious consumption” and using time-reminder notifications.

Source
[10]
[7]
[9]
[13]
[14]
[15]
[6]

E. The identified Gap
While existing work points to fact bots, their evaluation
is often conducted in isolation, without considering that the

Algorithm 1 Message Processing and Fact-Checking
Pipeline
1: A message is received from WhatsApp or Telegram via

WHAPI/Webhook.
2: The Orchestrator automatically places the message in a

queue to prevent system overload.
3: The Engine retrieves the message for processing.
4: The text is cleaned, normalized, and prepared for seman-

tic analysis.
5: The system detects the language and extracts only the

useful content.
6: An embedding is generated from the text using an AI

Fig. 1: Overview of the proposed Framework

corrective information provided through bots might paradoxically contribute to infobesity. This study proposes a framework that inherently integrates both infobesity management
and misinformation mitigation.
III. M ETHODOLOGY
The methodology developed in this work aims to balance
privacy with the mitigation of disinformation and infobesity
in closed social media platforms. The proposed framework
seeks to rapidly detect and correct disinformation in a highspeed news dissemination environment using an internal
database built from temporal scans of targeted and identified
safe and trustworthy information sources while offering the
potential to connect to other external existing fact-checking
APIs. The core idea is twofold: (1) detect early to stop the
spread of fake news, and (2) mark, group or flag responses to
messages that have been shared multiple times within a group
or across discussions, in order to avoid overloading users
with repeated or similar verified or unrelevant information.
Fig. 1 illustrates the high-level components of the proposed
framework.
It is a user-centric approach: each individual or group of
individuals can decide how to interact with the platform by
choosing either a private or group-based checking configuration at any time. This allows the system to collect messages
from private or group discussions—either automatically or
on demand—and submit them for verification. Once received
by the Orchestrator, a message is placed in a waiting list to
be processed by the Engine. The Engine performs several
tasks, including determining whether the message or a similar
one already exists, assessing its popularity, and evaluating its
authenticity (truthfulness or falseness). The topic detection
and the message relevance for further investigations are part
of the work that the engine is doing.
A. Algorithm
Algorithm 1 illustrates the message processing and the
fact-checking pipeline.

model.
system consults recent embeddings stored in a
temporary conversational memory.
8: A vector comparison is performed between the new
message and previous group messages.
9: The similarity is calculated to measure semantic closeness.
10: if similarity score exceeds threshold then
11:
Messages are considered to discuss the same topic.
12:
Similar messages are grouped into a conversational
cluster.
13: end if
14: The system checks if a response already exists for this
cluster.
15: if a similar response exists then
16:
The Engine avoids re-running the full RAG pipeline
to save resources.
17:
The system reuses the previous response or generates
a short contextual reply.
18:
The user is informed that the information is similar
to one already analyzed.
19:
The system may also return the previous verdict and
associated sources.
20: else
21:
A new response is generated and stored.
22: end if
23: Redundant queries are ignored or logically merged without overloading the conversation.
24: Only one main response remains visible in the group,
reducing information overload and improving readability.
7: The

B. Component details
This subsection provide detailed explanations of the
Crawler Fig. 3 and main components of the framework as
depicted in Fig. 2.
1) Crawler: In a RAG-based disinformation detection
architecture, the accuracy of responses depends on the freshness of the document base. To ensure reliable and continuously updated information, we implemented an automated
crawler that feeds the knowledge base used by the semantic
search engine and the fake news verification system. The
crawler retrieves articles from selected news sites, maintaining a constantly refreshed source of truth.

Fig. 2: Fact-checking and infobesity mitigation Framework.

Fig. 3: The Crawler scans targeted and known information
sources at short time intervals. The internal database is
therefore considered up to date, enabling rapid fact-checking
responses.

Its first task is to define the sources to be exploited, such as
RSS feeds, sitemaps, specific URLs, news platforms, blogs,
and national or international media. The choice of sources
is guided by criteria including language, country, category,
credibility, update frequency, and contextual relevance.
This selection ensures a diversified and reliable document
base, adapted to the needs of the verification system. Fig.3
illustrates the detailed information flow of the Crawler.
Technically, the crawler ensures that all collected information is stored in a dual-layer memory system. On one side,
it records structured metadata such as the title, date, source,
author, URL, and cleaned content of each article. On the
other side, it generates semantic embeddings from the text
and stores them separately for similarity search and semantic
retrieval.
This dual storage design allows the system to maintain
both a documentary memory (structured, reliable records of
articles) and a semantic memory (vector representations for
meaning and similarity). By continuously updating both layers, the crawler keeps the knowledge base fresh, relevant, and
ready for rapid fact-checking and RAG-based verification.
2) Orchestrator: The Orchestrator begins with user interactions through WhatsApp or Telegram groups, or private
one-to-one conversations. When a user shares information,
an image, a link, or a statement, the data is transmitted to the
system via secure APIs. Messages are received through Webhooks connected to WhatsApp and Telegram, which handle
incoming data, identify the sender and group, and temporarily
store messages in a queue. This queue ensures efficient
management of multiple simultaneous requests, while the
engine retrieves messages periodically through secure polling

for further analysis.
3) Engine: The Engine is responsible for processing and
analyzing incoming messages. After retrieval, it performs
filtering to remove duplicates, repetitive content, and irrelevant data, thereby reducing information overload in group
discussions. When similar content has already been analyzed,
the system avoids re-running a full verification and instead
reuses or summarizes existing responses.
To handle multimedia, the Engine integrates OCR to detect text within images, screenshots, or manipulated posters,
ensuring that visual content is included in the analysis. Extracted text then undergoes linguistic preprocessing, including cleaning, normalization, language detection, and named
entity recognition, which improves semantic understanding.
The system applies thematic and relevance analysis to
determine the main topic and whether deeper verification
is required. Core processing relies on a RAG architecture:
messages are converted into embeddings, semantic search
is performed in a vector database, and the most relevant
documents are retrieved to provide context for response generation. A similarity threshold ensures that only sufficiently
relevant sources are used; otherwise, the system returns
messages such as “Information not verifiable” or “Insufficient
sources.”
Finally, the Engine generates a user-oriented response that
may include a verdict on authenticity, a confidence level,
contextual explanations, references, and recommendations.
This enables the system to classify information as true, false,
misleading, out of context, or unverifiable, while maintaining
efficiency and reliability.
IV. I MPLEMENTATION AND D ISCUSSION
To evaluate our framework, we implemented a testbed
to track fake news and infobesity on WhatsApp in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo context, focusing on the
southern region of Lubumbashi. French was the primary language targeted, with English and Swahili also included. The
crawler scanned more than 13,000 articles, as summarized in
Table II.
Language
French
English
Swahili

Corpus Share
∼94%
∼5%
∼1.3%

Main Sources
Radio Okapi, 7sur7, mediacongo, RFI,etc
BBC, Guardian, VOA, DW (Africa/world feeds),etc
VOA Swahili, BBC Swahili, DW Kiswahili, RFI Swahili,etc

TABLE II: Language distribution and main sources of the
corpus
The system generates concise summaries and links drawn
exclusively from verified sources, with message indicators
classified as True, False, Imprecise, or Not Verifiable. It also
detects whether a message has been repeatedly circulated
within group discussions.
Results show that, in the DRC context, disinformation
can be mitigated through sourced and categorized responses,
while information overload is reduced by filters and the
avoidance of off-topic replies. The framework further enables
multilingual support, with French already dominant, English

progressing, and Swahili in its early stages. Future work will
focus on enriching the Swahili corpus, accelerating response
times, and conducting tests with real users to validate and
refine the system.
V. C ONCLUSION
The proposed framework aims at combating both infobesity and fake news dissemination on social media platforms
such as WhatsApp and Telegram. Its effectiveness relies on
enforcing the accuracy of responses, ensuring the intelligent
management of the fact-checking process and its outputs
(topic-related and relevance), and combining these with automatic signaling. By doing so, group members and individual
users are able to quickly identify which information is accurate, novel, and useful, thereby enhancing their engagement
with trustworthy content.
Designed to intelligently group, flag, and generate responses associated with reliable sources, the framework reduces both information overload and the spread of misinformation. The system demonstrates flexibility in integrating
diverse sources and languages, making it adaptable to different geographic and linguistic contexts.
Despite these benefits, further investigations are required
to evaluate its performance in specific environments. We
believe that deployment in real-world settings will provide
deeper insights and opportunities to refine and improve the
framework.
R EFERENCES
[1] G. P. Nobre, C. H. Ferreira, and J. M. Almeida, “A
hierarchical network-oriented analysis of user participation in
misinformation spread on whatsapp,” Information Processing
Management, vol. 59, no. 1, p. 102757, 2022. [Online]. Available:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0306457321002387
[2] E. Aı̈meur, S. Amri, and G. Brassard, “Fake news, disinformation and
misinformation in social media: a review,” Social Network Analysis
and Mining, vol. 13, no. 1, p. 30, Feb. 2023. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1007/s13278-023-01028-5
[3] S. Boudana and E. Segev, “Fake News Makes the News: Definitions
and Framing of Fake News in Mainstream Media,” Journalism
Practice, vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 679–698, Feb. 2026. [Online]. Available:
https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/17512786.2024.2379898
[4] H. Thakar and B. Bhatt, “Fake news detection: recent trends and
challenges,” Social Network Analysis and Mining, vol. 14, no. 1, p.
176, Aug. 2024. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/s13278024-01344-4
[5] Y. M. Eadon and S. E. Wood, “Combating contamination and contagion: Embodied and environmental metaphors of misinformation,”
Convergence: The International Journal of Research into New Media
Technologies, vol. 31, no. 2, pp. 500–520, Apr. 2025. [Online]. Available: https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/13548565241255347
[6] F. Akbuğa, “Dealing with social media fatigue: A focused
study on Gen Z,” Balıkesir Üniversitesi Sosyal Bilimler Enstitüsü
Dergisi, vol. 28, no. 53, pp. 379–397, 2025. [Online]. Available:
https://dergipark.org.tr/en/pub/baunsobed/issue/92372/1518611
[7] L. Frischlich, J. Klapproth, S. Frank, M. Heckmann, S. E.
Kunze, and T. Murgas, “Fighting Fakes on WhatsApp—Audience
Perspectives on Fact Bots as Countermeasures,” Digital Journalism,
vol. 12, no. 5, pp. 700–720, May 2024. [Online]. Available:
https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/21670811.2024.2341299
[8] B. Paris and I. Pasquetto, “Hidden Virality and the Everyday Burden
of Correcting WhatsApp Mis-and Disinformation,” Cambridge Studies
on Governing Knowledge Commons, 2024. [Online]. Available:
https://www.ideals.illinois.edu/items/126256

[9] S. Coulibaly, “Exploring health misinformation on WhatsApp
within the African migrant and refugee community in
Southeast Queensland (SEQ),” Media International Australia,
vol. 189, no. 1, pp. 8–23, Nov. 2023. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1177/1329878X231177836
[10] J. C. S. Reis, P. Melo, F. Belém, F. Murai, J. M. Almeida, and
F. Benevenuto, “Helping Fact-Checkers Identify Fake News Stories
Shared through Images on WhatsApp,” Aug. 2023, arXiv:2308.14782
[cs]. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/2308.14782
[11] G. Resende, P. Melo, H. Sousa, J. Messias, M. Vasconcelos,
J. Almeida, and F. Benevenuto, “(mis)information dissemination in
whatsapp: Gathering, analyzing and countermeasures,” in Proceedings
of the ACM Web Conference (WWW). ACM, 2019, pp. 818–828.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3308558.3313688
[12] Y. Liu, S. Xu, Y. Li, and S. Yu, “Evolution of
Malicious Social Bot Detection: From Individual Profiling to
Group Analysis and Beyond,” Journal of Social Computing,
vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 258–284, Sep. 2025. [Online]. Available:
https://www.sciopen.com/article/10.23919/JSC.2025.0017
[13] G. Wang, P. Garg, and W. Wu, “Segmented Summarization
and Refinement: A Pipeline for Long-Document Analysis
on Social Media,” Journal of Social Computing, vol. 5,
no. 2, pp. 132–144, Jun. 2024. [Online]. Available:
https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/10613026/
[14] X. Wang, Y. Gao, and L. Wang, “TRHF: A Study on Generating
Responses to Internet Troll Comments Based on LLM,” Journal of
Social Computing, vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 34–46, Mar. 2026. [Online].
Available: https://www.sciopen.com/article/10.23919/JSC.2025.0027
[15] D. Guilbeault and D. Centola, “Structural Synchronization in
Classification of Controversial Content,” Journal of Social Computing,
vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 287–299, Dec. 2025. [Online]. Available:
https://www.sciopen.com/article/10.23919/JSC.2025.0024

